From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist and
Scott Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing. Sure. Number one 93.
He recorded live Thursday, January 7th, 2010.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by teller at RB
controls. The most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications online@wwwdottelerik.com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with Nicholas Gustafson about the
incubation project. Axel. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. And today I have
the pleasure of speaking with
Nicholas Gustafson, a principal architect
on the parallel computing team.
How are you, sir? Oh,
hi Scott. How are you?
I'm pretty well. So I'm
glad that you took the
time to sit down and
chat with me about this.
Cause we've got an interesting
topic today. We're talking about
ACSM formerly called Maestro, and
this is something that was
part of a labs incubation.
This isn't a product yet,
right? Yeah, that's correct. So,
so I think it's important
to, to explain perhaps then
what, what incubation means at
Microsoft there, oftentimes when, you
know, based on just market
research and, and understanding our
customers, you know, through decades
of, of having relationships with
developers, we just sort of
understand exactly what's what the
right thing to do in
a, in a product, in
a product cycle. But often
it's also the case that
we, and particularly for perhaps
more advanced quote unquote advanced
projects or, or things that
we may have some doubts
about. It's not always clear
exactly what it is that
we need to put to
produce. And this is where
incubation or whether even things
are feasible to do. And
this is where incubation fits
in. It's not research in
the sense of trying to
advance the state of what
is known if you will,
but it's really trying to
advance with how things are
applied and what technologies that
are already established are feasible
to produce as Microsoft products.
And this is where Axiom
comes in. Also, it's a,
it's an incubation project at
Microsoft within the developer division.
So did, did it come
from research? I mean, what
is the process from someone
has a thought to someone
in Microsoft research has a
thought versus someone spins up
an incubation project within the
development division itself. Yeah. So
I would say that it's
inspired by research, but not
just by research within Microsoft
and not just by research
either. It's also inspired by
other other products that are,
that are out there. You
start with a problem that
you see not being solved
adequately and in, in current
products and a customer need.
And, and that customer meeting,
they need may not be
so immediate that you can
find it, or it's sort
of evaluated through just through
sort of a market analysis
or research. From that perspective,
you have to sort of
develop a technology prototype and
you have to, you have
to try it with customers.
And this is sort of
the approach we took with
ax and we it's inspired
by what's commonly referred to
as actor based or actor
oriented programming. It's also called
agent oriented programming. And the
idea there is that instead
of relying on shared memory
access to shared memory or
shared state and coordinating that
access through locks and other
forms of synchronization primitives, you
isolate state within agents and
you use message passing between
the agents to, to synchronize
and exchange information. But each
piece of data is at
any given point in time
in the program owned by
only one single threaded entity.
And there are, there are
other languages that do exactly
this Earline is an example
of a functional, you know,
pure functional language that, that
takes this approach. There are
elements of actor oriented programming
in, in languages like Scala
and F sharp, but accent
really tries to take it
one step further and really
be pretty rigid about the
isolation of forcement, neither scholar,
nor F sharp alien forces,
the isolation it's just sort
of suggests that it's a
good thing. They take the
pattern, but don't quite enforce
all the constraints that are
necessary to make the pattern
completely, completely safe. So one
of the questions for us,
and this is why, you
know, you want to test
this is, you know, how,
how critical is that enforcement?
How critical is it to
go beyond what you can
just do in libraries and
really implement this model, this
pattern in a language? Well,
that was my, that was
my next question is that,
you know, F sharp and
functional languages make the decision
to be functional. They, they,
they, they exist to be
functional and you get the
benefits of being functional with
a, you know, not having
shared state, but they don't
necessarily exist to be parallel.
Or are you saying that
that ACSM, you know, puts
a stake in the ground
and says we exist for
the purpose of being parallel
rather than just to be
functional? Yes. And, and, and
those are, those are not
necessarily coupled to each other,
a functional programming language need
not be a need not
be parallel or Lang as
an example of a, of
a functional language that is
designed to be parallel as
well as functional ACSM is
not, it's not a functional
language. It has more to
do. It has more in
common with C sharp, and
it does with F sharp.
And one thing to keep
in mind about F sharp
and Scalise is that there
they're both functional languages and
object oriented languages. So there's
sort of a, a mix
of the two and, and,
you know, any object oriented
language will be dependent on,
on shared state and shared
memory. Now, what we're trying
to do with Axiom is
to take an object oriented
context rather than a functional
context, and provide some isolation
around a state with an
actor model actor onto the
Mount model. That's, that's sitting
on top of a object
oriented environment rather than what
Erlynne does is to do
it on top of the
functional. Now, why wouldn't you
take an existing, an existing
language like Erlang or Scala
and make a dotnet version
of that? Why create a
new syntax? Well, let's talk
about Erlang this co Scott.
I think that this really
is, I mean, the F
sharp is, is to.net. What's
Scalise to the, to the
Java virtual machine. But if
you look at, if you
look at Erline, it's a
pure functional language, it's not,
it wouldn't be very straightforward
to take a language like
that and put it on.net
without giving up a lot
of what.net offers. So, for
example, most of the dotnet
class libraries are built on
the assumption that you're really
going to be using them
from an object oriented language.
They're really very, you know,
quite stateful class libraries. They
are, they really operate on
the idea that you're, that
you're manipulating and modifying objects,
and so built to build
something like our language, which
has a data model that
is first of all, completed
dynamically typed and is built
on the further built on
the idea that Allstate is
immutable or data is immutable,
and that you mutate by
or mutate the state by
building new copies of the
data that rather than changing
that you create new coffees.
So it's a completely different
model. You wouldn't be able
to leverage a lot of
dots with.net has to offer
in terms of a built
in types and class libraries.
If you try to build
our line on top of
it. So what Axiom is,
is trying to accomplish is
to build a model that
works well with.net and leveraged
has all of that net
and where you, in your
program, you have access to
all of that math and
can use it productively, but
add some form of some
measure of isolation on top
of that as a, some
measure of safety on top
of that, And this was
something that needed to be
another language, as opposed to
being some kind of extension,
or like the way that,
you know, you could, you
could have, could you not
have created some, you know,
basically spot welded something onto
C-sharp itself? Well, we could.
And absolutely. And this is
one of the questions, you
know, when you go from
incubation to product to station,
what is the right strategy
to take there? What we,
what we wanted to do
was we wanted to have
some, we want to have
more degrees of freedom if
you will, in our experimentation.
That's what incubation is about
after all this experimentation and
finding the right solution without
being in the artist stages
of, of your development being
too strictly tied to some
existing set of constraints that
may not really have to
anything to do with the
problem that you're trying to,
to experiment with. So doing
it as a, as a
separate language gives you a
lot more freedom to, to
experiment That that is actually
a very good explanation. That
makes a lot of sense.
Cause I think that sometimes
people look at these things
from outside and they just
go, what is going on
inside of Microsoft? They're inventing
new languages. There's, you know,
there's, these problems are solved,
but you're right from a,
from a skunkworks perspective, it's
much more freeing for you
to explore the space with
a fresh language and a
separate compiler than it would
be to try to shoehorn
an existing thing on top
of the, the CLR That's
that's right. And so, so,
so that's, that's the primary
reason for doing an essay
separate language during the incubation
phase. Now that leads to
the question of what, how
would you really productize something
like this and, and what
would it look like? And
those are questions that were,
you know, there, we're thinking
about, you know, right now,
and is in a, you
know, as a next step
and, and whether it's all
of it that makes it
into, you could wind up
with a solution where you
certain aspects of a language
like this, make it into
certain, you know, into some
languages and other aspects of
it, make it into other
languages. It's all sort of
unclear at this point, what
the right solution is. And
it may actually be that
the right solution is to
have what I call a
special purpose language, which is
what we sort of build
acts mass one, where you
would expect users to write
only pieces of your application
in that special purpose language.
And then most of the
majority of your, your application
would probably be written in
a general purpose language, such
as C sharp or visual
basic doesn't that that's something
we're struggling with right now,
but, but it's not part
of the problem domain, if
you will. What is the,
the contract between you and
the people who are involved
in an incubation? If someone
decides to build their business
around an incubation project, is,
are they sound like they're
taking a pretty big chance?
Is that pretty clear up
front and be like, what
is your obligation to them
to support this thing that
is not supported? So one
of the obligations is to
be very upfront about what
our commitments are to a
project like this and, and
being very honest and direct
about what we mean by
incubation and, and the fact
that this is something that
is intended to inspire thoughts,
and I inspire ideas and
inspire you as a, as
a user of it. Or
some somebody picks it up
and experiments with it to
rethink maybe how you're doing,
how you're looking at problems
and, and maybe just expand
your, the way that you
look at the future of,
of parallel programming. It's not,
and we've, you know, been
very clear about this throughout,
and I want to reiterate
it now, we're not committing
to shipping this in this
form at all. We're hoping
to, but we're not saying
to anybody that this is
a, this is a for
sure thing. So, you know,
we certainly don't recommend anybody
to build a business around
it that would be taking
a huge risk. But what
we do encourage anybody to
do is to get it
out of the dev labs,
try it out and, and
contribute thinking to this problem.
And if it's this, the
right solution, are there things
missing? Is there too much
in it? One of our
concerns is that Axiom is
a lot bigger than perhaps
is it feasible to try
to try to introduce in,
in, in.net right now, or
in the, in, in sort
of the, the market right
now, what is the minimalist
approach to this problem? What,
what can we yank out
of accent method is defined
right now and wind up
with something that is mostly
as powerful as, as what
we've defined. Do you know
how to make the possible
out of the impossible? Well,
the dotnet ninjas at Telerik
do they just released a
huge pack of web controls,
all built on top of
ESPN at Ajax, that'll help
you build impossibly fast and
interactive applications in no time
at all. They've made the
impossible possible and desktop development.
If you think you can't
have a carousel component and
wind forms, well, you can.
They're windows forms, suite features
a super powerful grid, view
control, and 32 other crazy
desktop components. That'll give you
a dazzling WPF like features,
but in wind farms, they
do the same thing in
reporting solutions with a new
design service, like nothing else
looks just like graph paper
gives you advanced page layout
capabilities. It makes it feel
more like a graphic design
software than a reporting solution.
Go check them out@telerikdotcomandbeat.net Ninja.
Thanks for listening. Now, I
know that everyone is thinking
about parallelism at Microsoft right
now, and I've talked to
various folks about how to
make parallel accessible parallelism accessible
to the masses. And I
just literally last night put
together a very inexpensive machine
with a friend of mine
that had eight cores. I
feel like, you know, we're
going to blink and there's
going to be 16 cores
on the desktop, you know,
within, within a year, this
is part of that larger
kind of push towards making
parallelism accessible to people. Yeah.
So, so I think, I
think that's absolutely right. What,
one of the major problems
with the tools and the
PR and what we have
platforms that we have available
today is that they were
built for, for concurrency, where
you have limited needs to,
to run things in parallel.
And they're typically driven by,
you know, either the need
when you had it. It
was either because you were
trying to unblock a gooey
spread for example, or you
were trying to leverage latency
in terms of, you know,
while you were doing this
guy or a network, I
were doing other things so
that the overall application responsiveness
would be higher with all
this, all this power, while
you have eight course, you
know, I have an eight
core box at home and,
you know, of course, 99%
of the time it's, it's,
you know, completely idle. And
a little bit of the
time it runs maybe, you
know, five or 10% of
its of its capacity. And
very rarely does it actually
use all of its capacity
because there's applications just aren't
written for it. And now
we have all this capacity
capacity. We can use it
for parallelism, where you're actually
trying to take an algorithm
and run even just the
computation, not just overlapping it
with IO, but run the
computation computations inside the application
in parallel and speed up
how quickly computations finish that
will give us just completely
new opportunities for new, new
user experiences and new quicker,
more in depth analysis of
data and so on and
so forth. But it's hard.
It's hard because we have,
haven't built it for that
type of, we haven't built
the platforms for that type
of, of usage by, by
sort of the developer masses.
And even for the very
advanced developers, it's tricky accessing
memory cells, if you will.
I mean, the kind of
model we have is that
you have memory cells and
you have threads and the
threads are accessing the memory
cells, incompletely without any coordination
and all, any coordination by
the system that is, and
all the coordination is responsibility
is put on the programmer.
And so we have a
model that's extremely random, if
you will, non-deterministic and its
execution behavior. And we're asking
developers to reign in that
non determinism Right now, this
is really interesting. I think
that you kind of, there's
almost a throwaway statement in
there, but I think that
really, for me crystallizes the
whole idea that we're at
we're, we're running around and
we're accessing memory in a,
in a fairly ad hoc
way. And the responsibility is
on the programmer on how
to manage these shared resources.
And there's a really great
blog posts up on the
MSDN at the, the older
site called Maestro team back
when action was called my
show that has some visualizations
that really explain that. So
maybe we can change gears
a little bit and talk
about this because this really
crystallized it for me. Like
we've been talking for a
while here and there may
be some folks that have
felt we've geeked out a
little too much and forgotten
to talk about like, what
exactly is this thing? And
you give an example of
a multithreaded application where we're
gonna run through a list
of items that are in
some shared state and sort
them and put them back
together. So it's, it's a
very contentious application and there's
this wonderful visualization that shows
how much waiting for locks
is going on. You've got
all this parallelism and the
worker threads, the parts of
the application that are doing
the work. They go work,
work, work, all right, I'm
done. Now, I'm going to
get in line to tell
you about the work. And
then they wait for a
while and then they work,
work, work, and then they
get in line to tell
you about the work. But
then when you introduce a,
a message passing algorithm, you've
got one thread that's doing
the updating of the data
structure while the worker threads
actually work. And it really
got me thinking that I
think most of my worker
threads aren't working at all
Right. And that's correct. I
mean, you're, you're spending so
much time synchronizing and, and
worrying. And to some degree
it's a performance issue, right?
To some degree it's a
productivity issue because the amount
of time you spend debugging
your ad hoc methodology for
synchronization is, is tremendous. I
mean, we have, we have
lots of data that supports
this, that, that developing concurrent
applications is many times less
productive than developing a sequential
application because of the ad
hoc methodologies that are available
now. So what Axiom is
trying to do there, so
it's, it's trying to put
some constraints on this, and
this is another reason why
languages are necessary because frameworks
are good at enabling not
constraining. And what you really
need to do here is
you need to constrain the
patterns that people can use
for powerless, Right? So you're
setting them up for success
in parallelism, by following the
rules in the framework that
you've laid out, parallelism will
just happen. That's correct. And
you won't even think about
it. So the idea is
correct by construction. In other
words, that if you write
your parallel application in Axiom,
it will enforce a pattern
for your application that is
safe, inherently safe from data
racist. That is these, the,
the accidental reordering of access
to, to, to memory cells.
There are other hazards in
parallel programming, like deadlocks that
ask them does not necessarily
deal with, Well, that's an
interesting question then what, what
doesn't Axiom deal with? Well,
So, so deadlocks is the,
it's the primary one. Now
deadlocks, fortunately, is among the
problems that are hard to
debug in, in parallel programming
data. Racist is by far
the, the, you know, the
most common first and then
also extremely hard given the
tools that we have today.
Deadlocks are fortunately, I mean,
sometimes they are quite intricate,
but you usually hang and
you know that you have
it, there's this, the signs
are, are there for you.
You, you know that you
have it, they erase, this
can be extremely hard to
detect because they're the side
effects of databases are sometimes
benign and sometimes not. And
it's, they're very intermittent deadlocks.
You're you just break into
the program with a debugger
and look at where all
the threads are fixing the
problem. Cause there'll be a
challenge, but at least you
can detect it much easier.
So, so one of the
things that we're doing in
accident, and we have this
thing called a protocol where
we define between agents. We
define a communication channels. This
is where the messages are
being passed between agents. And
we actually add formal protocols
to those channels. And once
you have the formality of,
so the protocols express the
order of messages that can
go between agents and because
we're not allowing you to
take locks in accent, agents
cannot synchronize their actions of
using locks. You can't have
any deadlocks through locks. All
your deadlocks can only happen
through, through messaging where you're
trying to access you. You're
doing things you're expecting some
value from me, and I'm
not going to be sending
it to you because I'm
expecting a value from you.
That's kind of the message
passing deadlock, if you will,
but by defining formal protocols
for how you and I,
you know, if you and
I are agents in this
program, how we interact, we
can get rid of a
lot of deadlock situations. If
we also add some more
advanced analysis tools, static analysis
tools that compare the code.
I write in my agent
against the protocol for the
communication channel and see what
are really following and living
up to that protocol or
not. And this is not
something that still remains to
be incubated, but it's something
that theoretically should be straightforward
to do. And that's something
we've experimented within Microsoft, not
I wasn't involved, but Microsoft
has experimented with another research
project. So, so we have
a theoretical solution to that.
We haven't applied it, but
on the data race side,
we have applied as an
ACSM. You know, an accent
program should be free of
data racist. If you use
accent sort of at the
top of your application architecture,
which is where it's designed
to be or intended to
be used. So if someone,
if someone sits down for
this for the first time
and they download this, they're
there, they're bringing what onto
their machine. Sometimes when I'm
going to put something on
my machine from Microsoft, I'm
concerned that it's going to
mess up projects that I'm
existing, you know, I'm working
on. So what are the
options for getting involved and
getting started with ACSM? Right?
So actually it's just a,
the download is an MSI,
just a regular installation image.
It builds on top of
doc. That's 3.5 and visual
studio 2008 is expected. We
can, you can use just
to command line version also,
but we certainly recommend that
visual studio 2008 is, is
your environment for it. And
there's, you know, there's nothing
special about it. It's just
a salsa, no other language
service into visual studio and
adds a few libraries to
your.net environment and a few
samples. And that's pretty much
it there's, there's nothing, nothing
special about it. It's just
another couple of libraries and,
and the computer. Okay. So
this is, it's not gonna,
it's not going to put
things in my gack, they're
going to make existing projects
break. No, it's not replacing
anything. It's not patching anything.
So it should be completely
safe from that perspective. And
the uninstaller, as far as
our testing goes, it seems
to be working just fine.
So cleaning out fill machine
afterwards is, is, is supported
also. So then the ACSM
light is these is the
command line compiler. If I
just want to do things
like in an EMIS build
situation, or if I really
want to keep things isolated,
but I really should use
the visual studio addition. And
w what does that add
to visual studio? It has
another language. So if you're
familiar with sort of the,
the visual studio environment, right,
you have, if you install
a, not just one language,
but you know, the whole
visual studio installation, you know,
with pro or something like
that, you get visual C
plus, plus you get a
C sharp, you get VB.
So Axiom just shows up
as another language and with
a couple of project templates
and item templates and visual
studio and a sample, that's
pretty much it. So then
I w I could just
take an existing application and
add a new library. So
it just be like having
a solution with multiple languages.
So I could have C-sharp
Phoebe and ACSM. Yep. That's
right. Okay. Now, can I
use ACSM within an existing
application, or because we can't
have mixed language at assemblies
in visual studio, we'd have
to do that a different
way. Right. So, so that's
the visual studio limitation in
that you can't mix ACSM
and VB, for example, or,
and VB in the same
project, but you kind of
have them in the same
solution. Of course. All right.
Very cool. And one thing
I'm curious about, and this
is just a little bit
of an obscure question, but
I'm a, an Afro file.
And I noticed that Maestro
makes sense as a name.
This was the previous code
name, cause the Maestro is
a conductor and it's, you
know, it's, it's, it's an
evocative name, but, but ACSM
is a province in Ethiopia.
And I can't think about
it. I'm trying to figure
out why you would name
the product ACSM. The thing
that's significant about ACSM in,
in mythology is that they
say that the, the 10
commandments exist in a church
in Aksum in Ethiopia. But
I, I can't tell if
that means anything about parallelism.
So, so the tradition at
Microsoft is that code names
that are, are made public
should be based on geographical
locations. And so, so we
just, we just had to
pick something and we wanted
to pick something that was
a little bit obscure and
not just something common. And,
you know, I, you know,
I I'm, I'm a, I'm
personally I'm Swedish, but I
have some, some connections to
Ethiopia. And I just decided
that, Hey, that's, that would
be a cool name to
have. And, but really the
obscurity of it was, was
part of the charm of,
of picking a name like
that. I think that's great.
I was, I was thinking
before the interview, I'm like,
okay, let me think. Well,
the thing that's significant about
ACSM is that the 10
commandments are there and everyone
wants them to be released,
but no one's seen them.
Maybe if Axiom get, gets
released from Microsoft, that'll say
something about the 10 commandments
being released from Ethiopia. No,
I just, I just, I
just wanted people to, when
they heard the name, I
thought it would be cool
if people actually had to
research what that was rather
than just, you know, Well,
we have mission accomplished. I
knew immediately. I said, Oh,
wow, okay. That's a cool,
that's a cool name. So
the, the, the blog used
to is called Maestro team,
has that moved in fact,
because you can find information
about Axiom. I was Googling
with being, and I found
ACSM information in multiple locations
where where's the primary place
to find the, the latest
on ACSM. So I, I,
there are two places, one
on MSDN dev labs. And
the other one is that
my store team blog, it
turned out that it was
while changing. The code name
was quite straightforward, particularly because
we did it before we
released it, changing, changing the
blog address and so on
and so forth because we
had lots of links everywhere.
We just didn't want to
go through that. So, so
the blog is actually still
blogs that msdn.com/my strongest core
team. And, but that is
the official ACSM blog. It's
been a little bit inactive
in the last couple of
months because we have really,
haven't had anything public to,
to talk about, about accents
lately, but, but there's tons
of information on there. There's
a forum on dev labs
also been a little bit
inactive lately because we haven't
had anything public to release
there. We haven't updated the
verse, the accent release in,
in, in some time, but
there's, there's lots of information
there. Lots of things to
go through and look at
it is alive. And the
download is there at dev
labs,  dot com slash
dev labs. And it has
great samples. And those samples
are a lot of what
the forum discussions are about,
are about samples and questions
around it and elaborations on
those things. So that might,
it might help to do
the download and before looking
at the forum. Okay. Very,
very cool. I'll put the
links for that up on
the show site, that's msdn.com/dev
labs, and there's a lot
of different projects up there.
One of which is ACSM
and then blogs that understand.com/maestro
team. And of course, if
you just search on the
web for Axiom, a X,
U M programming, I was
able to find all of
these things as well as
some interesting presentations videos at,
at various conferences on this
topic. But thanks so much,
Nicholas. I really appreciate your
time. Okay. Well, thank you
Scott, for having me. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we'll see
you again next week.